---
title: Sunday School - WCF Chapter 8 Of Christ the Mediator
description: "Trinity Presbyterian Church: Studies in the Westminster Confession of Faith on Christ the Mediator"
url: 
date: 2023-11-12
layout: post
category: post
blockquote: false
youtube: false
tags:
  - Sunday-school
  - TPC
  - WCF-8
  - christology
---

{% imagePlaceholder "./src/assets/images/WCF-6.png", "Title page with white text on a dark blue background reading 'Chapter 6: Of the Fall of Man, Sin & Punishment Thereof'", "" %}

Here is my [presentation.](https://www.dropbox.com/s/slqnamv2dlc3i54/SS-2023-10-29-WCF-6.pdf?dl=0)

## Chapter 8 with scripture proofs

### Section 1

It pleased God, in his eternal purpose, to choose and ordain the Lord Jesus, his only begotten Son, to be the Mediator between God and man, the Prophet, Priest, and King, the Head and Savior of his church, the Heir of all things, and Judge of the world: unto whom he did from all eternity give a people, to be his seed, and to be by him in time redeemed, called, justified, sanctified, and glorified.

### Section 2

The Son of God, the second person in the Trinity, being very and eternal God, of one substance and equal with the Father, did, when the fullness of time was come, take upon him man’s nature, with all the essential properties, and common infirmities thereof, yet without sin; being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the virgin Mary, of her substance. So that two whole, perfect, and distinct natures, the Godhead and the manhood, were inseparably joined together in one person, without conversion, composition, or confusion. Which person is very God, and very man, yet one Christ, the only Mediator between God and man.

### Section 3

The Lord Jesus, in his human nature thus united to the divine, was sanctified, and anointed with the Holy Spirit, above measure, having in him all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; in whom it pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell; to the end that, being holy, harmless, undefiled, and full of grace and truth, he might be thoroughly furnished to execute the office of a mediator, and surety. Which office he took not unto himself, but was thereunto called by his Father, who put all power and judgment into his hand, and gave him commandment to execute the same.

### Section 4

This office the Lord Jesus did most willingly undertake; which that he might discharge, he was made under the law, and did perfectly fulfill it; endured most grievous torments immediately in his soul, and most painful sufferings in his body; was crucified, and died, was buried, and remained under the power of death, yet saw no corruption. On the third day he arose from the dead, with the same body in which he suffered, with which also he ascended into heaven, and there sitteth at the right hand of his Father, making intercession, and shall return, to judge men and angels, at the end of the world.

### Section 5

The Lord Jesus, by his perfect obedience, and sacrifice of himself, which he, through the eternal Spirit, once offered up unto God, hath fully satisfied the justice of his Father; and purchased, not only reconciliation, but an everlasting inheritance in the kingdom of heaven, for all those whom the Father hath given unto him.

### Section 6

Although the work of redemption was not actually wrought by Christ till after his incarnation, yet the virtue, efficacy, and benefits thereof were communicated unto the elect, in all ages successively from the beginning of the world, in and by those promises, types, and sacrifices, wherein he was revealed, and signified to be the seed of the woman which should bruise the serpent’s head; and the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; being yesterday and today the same, and forever.

### Section 7

Christ, in the work of mediation, acts according to both natures, by each nature doing that which is proper to itself; yet, by reason of the unity of the person, that which is proper to one nature is sometimes in Scripture attributed to the person denominated by the other nature.

## Section 8

To all those for whom Christ hath purchased redemption, he doth certainly and effectually apply and communicate the same; making intercession for them, and revealing unto them, in and by the Word, the mysteries of salvation; effectually persuading them by his Spirit to believe and obey, and governing their hearts by his Word and Spirit; overcoming all their enemies by his almighty power and wisdom, in such manner, and ways, as are most consonant to his wonderful and unsearchable dispensation.

## Related Questions from the Westminster Larger Catechism

### Question 21

_Did man continue in that estate wherein God at first created him?_

A. Our first parents being left to the freedom of their own will, through the temptation of Satan, transgressed the commandment of God in eating the forbidden fruit; and thereby fell from the estate of innocency wherein they were created. (Gen. 3:6--8, 13; Eccl. 7:29, 2 Cor. 11:3)

### Question 22

_Did all mankind fall in that first transgression?_

A. The covenant being made with Adam as a public person, not for himself only, but for his posterity, all mankind descending from him by ordinary generation (Acts 17:26 ; Rom. 3:23.), sinned in him, and fell with him in that first transgression.( Gen. 2:16--17; James 2:10; Rom. 5:12--20; 1 Cor. 15:21--22)

### Question 23

_Into what estate did the fall bring mankind?_

A. The fall brought mankind into an estate of sin and misery. (Gen. 3:16--19; Rom. 5:12; Eph. 2:1; Rom. 3:16, 23)

### Question 24

_What is sin?_

A. Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of, any law of God, given as a rule to the reasonable creature. (Lev. 5:17; James 4:17; 1 John 3:4; Gal. 3:10, 12)

### Question 25

_Wherein consisteth the sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell?_

A. The sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell, consisteth in the guilt of Adam's first sin (Rom. 5:12, 19; 1 Cor. 15:22), the want of that righteousness wherein he was created, and the corruption of his nature, whereby he is utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite unto all that is spiritually good, and wholly inclined to all evil, and that continually (Rom. 3:10-19; Eph. 2:1--3; Rom. 5:6; Rom. 8:7--8; Gen. 6:5; Col. 3:10; Eph. 4:24); which is commonly called original sin, and from which do proceed all actual transgressions (James 1:14--15; Ps. 53:1--3; Matt. 15:19; Rom. 3:10--18, 23; Gal. 5:19--21).

### Question 26

_How is original sin conveyed from our first parents unto their posterity?_

A. Original sin is conveyed from our first parents unto their posterity by natural generation, so as all that proceed from them in that way are conceived and born in sin. (Ps. 51:5; Job 14:4; John 3:6)

### Question 27

_What misery did the fall bring upon mankind?_

A. The fall brought upon mankind the loss of communion with God (Gen. 3:8, 10, 24; John 8:34, 42, 44; Eph. 2:12), his displeasure and curse (Gen. 3:16--19; Job 5:7; Eccl. 2:22--23; Rom. 8:18--23); so as we are by nature children of wrath (Eph. 2:2--3; John 3:36; Rom. 1:18; Eph. 5:6) , bond slaves to Satan (2 Tim. 2:26), and justly liable to all punishments in this world, and that which is to come.( Gen. 2:17; Lam. 3:39; Rom. 6:23; Matt. 25:41, 46; Jude 7)

### Question 28

_What are the punishments of sin in this world?_

A. The punishments of sin in this world are either inward, as blindness of mind (Eph. 4:18), a reprobate sense (Rom. 1:28), strong delusions (2 Thess. 2:11), hardness of heart (Rom. 2:5), horror of conscience (Isa. 33:14; Gen. 4:13; Matt. 27:4), and vile affections (Rom. 1:26); or outward, as the curse of God upon the creatures for our sakes (Gen. 3:17), and all other evils that befall us in our bodies, names, estates, relations, and employments (Deut. 28:15-68); together with death itself. (Rom. 6:21, 23)

### Question 29

_What are the punishments of sin in the world to come?_

A. The punishments of sin in the world to come, are everlasting separation from the comfortable presence of God, and most grievous torments in soul and body, without intermission, in hell-fire forever. (2 Thess. 1:9; Mark 9:43--44, 46, 48; Luke 16:24, 26; Matt. 25:41, 46; Rev. 14:11; John 3:36)

## Related Questions from the Westminster Shorter Catechism

### Question 20

_Did God leave all mankind to perish in the estate of sin and misery?_

A. God, having out of his mere good pleasure, from all eternity, elected some to everlasting life, (Acts 13:48., Eph. 1:4–5., 2 Thess. 2:13–14.) did enter into a covenant of grace to deliver them out of the estate of sin and misery, and to bring them into an estate of salvation by a Redeemer. (Gen. 3:15., Gen. 17:7., Ex. 19:5–6., Jer. 31:31–34., Matt. 20:28., 1 Cor. 11:25., Heb. 9:15.)

### Question 21

_Who is the Redeemer of God’s elect?_

A. The only Redeemer of God’s elect is the Lord Jesus Christ,g who, being the eternal Son of God,h became man,i and so was, and continueth to be, God and man in two distinct natures, and one per- son, forever.k

### Question 22

_How did Christ, being the Son of God, become man?_

A. Christ, the Son of God, became man, by taking to himself a true body, and a reasonable soul,l being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and born of her,m yet without sin.n

### Question 23

_What offices doth Christ execute as our Redeemer?_

A. Christ, as our Redeemer, executeth the offices of a prophet,o of a priest,p and of a king,q both in his estate of humiliation and exaltation.

### Question 24

_How doth Christ execute the office of a prophet?_

A. Christ executeth the office of a prophet, in revealing to us, by his Wordr and Spirit,s the will of God for our salvation.t

### Question 25

_How doth Christ execute the office of a priest?_

A. Christ executeth the office of a priest, in his once offering up of himself a sacrifice to satisfy divine justice,u and reconcile us to God,w and in making continual intercession for us.x

### Question 26

_How doth Christ execute the office of a king?_

A. Christ executeth the office of a king, in subduing us to him- self, in ruling and defending us,y and in restraining and conquering all his and our enemies.z

### Question 27

_Wherein did Christ’s humiliation consist?_

A. Christ’s humiliation consisted in his being born, and that in a low condition,a made under the law,b undergoing the miseries of this life,c the wrath of God,d and the cursed death of the cross;e in being buried, and continuing under the power of death for a time.f

### Question 28

_Wherein consisteth Christ’s exaltation?_

A. Christ’s exaltation consisteth in his rising again from the dead on the third day,g in ascending up into heaven,h in sitting at the right hand of God the Father,i and in coming to judge the world at the last day.k

## Resources

- [Walking Through Westminster - WCF 6, Of the Fall of Man, of Sin & of the Punishment Thereof](https://presbycast.libsyn.com/walking-through-westminster-wcf-6-of-the-fall-of-man-of-sin-of-the-punishment-thereof) podcast
- Meadowview Reformed Presbyterian Church (PCA) [Westminster Confession 6 - The Fall, Sin, & Punishment](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5TjKIHTqvmU&)
- A growing list of [resources on the Westminster Standards.](/notes/resources-on-the-westminster-standards/)
