---
title: "Sunday School - WCF Chapter 6 Of the Fall of Man, Sin & Punishment Thereof"
description: "Trinity Presbyterian Church: Studies in the Westminster Confession of Faith on the Fall of Man, Sin & Punishment Thereof"
url: 
date: 2023-10-29T20:00:00
layout: post
category: post
blockquote: false
youtube: false
tags:
    - sin
    - Sunday-school
    - TPC
    - WCF-6
---

{% eleventyImage "./src/assets/images/WCF-6.png", "Title page with white text on a dark blue background reading 'Chapter 6: Of the Fall of Man, Sin & Punishment Thereof'", "" %}

Here is my [presentation.](https://www.dropbox.com/s/slqnamv2dlc3i54/SS-2023-10-29-WCF-6.pdf?dl=0)

## Chapter 6 with scripture proofs

### Section 1

Our first parents being seduced by the subtlety and temptation of Satan, sinned, in eating the forbidden fruit. (Gen. 3:13; 2 Cor. 11:3.) This their sin, God was pleased, according to his wise and holy counsel to permit, having purposed to order it to his own glory. (Rom. 11:32.)

### Section 2

By this sin they fell from their original righteousness and communion with God, (Gen. 3:6-8; Eccles. 7:29; Rom. 3:23) and so became dead in sin, (Gen. 2:17; Eph. 2:1.) and wholly defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul and body. (Titus 1:15; Gen. 6:5; Jer. 17:9; Rom. 3:10-19.)

### Section 3

They being the root of all mankind, the guilt of this sin was imputed, (Gen. 1:27,28, and Gen. 2:16,17, and Acts 17:26, with Rom. 5:12,15-19, and 1 Cor. 15:21,22,49.) and the same death in sin and corrupted nature, conveyed to all their posterity descending from them by ordinary generation. (Psa. 51:5; Gen. 5:3; Job 14:4; Job 15:14.)

### Section 4

From this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all good, (Rom. 5:6; Rom. 8:7; Rom. 7:18; Col. 1:21.) and wholly inclined to all evil, (Gen. 6:5; Gen. 8:21; Rom. 3:10-12.) do proceed all actual transgressions. (James 1:14,15; Eph. 2:2,3; Matt. 15:19.)

### Section 5

This corruption of nature, during this life, does remain in those that are regenerated; (1 John 1:8,10; Rom. 7:14,17,18,23; James 3:2; Prov. 20:9; Eccles. 7:20.) and, although it be, through Christ, pardoned, and mortified, yet both itself, and all the motions thereof are truly and properly sin. (Rom. 7:5,7,8,25; Gal. 5:17.)

### Section 6

Every sin, both original and actual, being a transgression of the righteous law of God, and contrary thereunto, (1 John 3:4.) does, in its own nature, bring guilt upon the sinner; (Rom. 2:15; Rom. 3:9,19.) whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God, (Eph. 2:3) and curse of the law, (Gal. 3:10) and so made subject to death, (Rom. 6:23) with all miseries spiritual, (Eph. 4:18) temporal, (Rom. 8:20; Lam. 3:39.) and eternal. (Matt. 25:41; 2 Thess. 1:9.)

## Related Questions from the Westminster Larger Catechism

### Question 21

_Did man continue in that estate wherein God at first created him?_

A. Our first parents being left to the freedom of their own will, through the temptation of Satan, transgressed the commandment of God in eating the forbidden fruit; and thereby fell from the estate of innocency wherein they were created. (Gen. 3:6--8, 13; Eccl. 7:29, 2 Cor. 11:3)

### Question 22

_Did all mankind fall in that first transgression?_

A. The covenant being made with Adam as a public person, not for himself only, but for his posterity, all mankind descending from him by ordinary generation (Acts 17:26 ; Rom. 3:23.), sinned in him, and fell with him in that first transgression.( Gen. 2:16--17; James 2:10; Rom. 5:12--20; 1 Cor. 15:21--22)

### Question 23

_Into what estate did the fall bring mankind?_

A. The fall brought mankind into an estate of sin and misery. (Gen. 3:16--19; Rom. 5:12; Eph. 2:1; Rom. 3:16, 23)

### Question 24

_What is sin?_

A. Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of, any law of God, given as a rule to the reasonable creature. (Lev. 5:17; James 4:17; 1 John 3:4; Gal. 3:10, 12)

### Question 25

_Wherein consisteth the sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell?_

A. The sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell, consisteth in the guilt of Adam's first sin (Rom. 5:12, 19; 1 Cor. 15:22), the want of that righteousness wherein he was created, and the corruption of his nature, whereby he is utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite unto all that is spiritually good, and wholly inclined to all evil, and that continually (Rom. 3:10-19; Eph. 2:1--3; Rom. 5:6; Rom. 8:7--8; Gen. 6:5; Col. 3:10; Eph. 4:24); which is commonly called original sin, and from which do proceed all actual transgressions (James 1:14--15; Ps. 53:1--3; Matt. 15:19; Rom. 3:10--18, 23; Gal. 5:19--21).

### Question 26

_How is original sin conveyed from our first parents unto their posterity?_

A. Original sin is conveyed from our first parents unto their posterity by natural generation, so as all that proceed from them in that way are conceived and born in sin. (Ps. 51:5; Job 14:4; John 3:6)

### Question 27

_What misery did the fall bring upon mankind?_

A. The fall brought upon mankind the loss of communion with God (Gen. 3:8, 10, 24; John 8:34, 42, 44; Eph. 2:12), his displeasure and curse (Gen. 3:16--19; Job 5:7; Eccl. 2:22--23; Rom. 8:18--23); so as we are by nature children of wrath (Eph. 2:2--3; John 3:36; Rom. 1:18; Eph. 5:6) , bond slaves to Satan (2 Tim. 2:26), and justly liable to all punishments in this world, and that which is to come.( Gen. 2:17; Lam. 3:39; Rom. 6:23; Matt. 25:41, 46; Jude 7)

### Question 28

_What are the punishments of sin in this world?_

A. The punishments of sin in this world are either inward, as blindness of mind (Eph. 4:18), a reprobate sense (Rom. 1:28), strong delusions (2 Thess. 2:11), hardness of heart (Rom. 2:5), horror of conscience (Isa. 33:14; Gen. 4:13; Matt. 27:4), and vile affections (Rom. 1:26); or outward, as the curse of God upon the creatures for our sakes (Gen. 3:17), and all other evils that befall us in our bodies, names, estates, relations, and employments (Deut. 28:15-68); together with death itself. (Rom. 6:21, 23)

### Question 29

_What are the punishments of sin in the world to come?_

A. The punishments of sin in the world to come, are everlasting separation from the comfortable presence of God, and most grievous torments in soul and body, without intermission, in hell-fire forever. (2 Thess. 1:9; Mark 9:43--44, 46, 48; Luke 16:24, 26; Matt. 25:41, 46; Rev. 14:11; John 3:36)

## Related Questions from the Westminster Shorter Catechism

### Question 13

_Did our first parents continue in the estate wherein they were created?_

A. Our first parents, being left to the freedom of their own will, fell from the estate wherein they were created, by sinning against God. (Gen. 3:6--8, 13; 2 Cor. 11:3.)

### Question 14

_What is sin?_

A. Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of, the law of God. (Lev. 5:17; James 4:17; 1 John 3:4.)

### Question 15

_What was the sin whereby our first parents fell from the estate wherein they were created?_

A. The sin whereby our first parents fell from the estate wherein they were created, was their eating the forbidden fruit. (Gen. 3:6.)

### Question 16

_Did all mankind fall in Adam's first transgression?_

A. The covenant being made with Adam (Gen. 2:16--17; James 2:10), not only for himself, but for his posterity; all mankind, descending from him by ordinary generation, sinned in him, and fell with him, in his first transgression. (Rom. 5:12--21; 1 Cor. 15:22) 

### Question 17

_Into what estate did the fall bring mankind?_

A. The fall brought mankind into an estate of sin and misery. (Gen. 3:16--19, 23.; Rom. 3:16; Rom. 5:12; Eph. 2:1)

### Question 18

_Wherein consists the sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell?_

A. The sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell, consists in the guilt of Adam's first sin (Rom. 5:12, 19), the want of original righteousness (Rom. 3:10; Col. 3:10; Eph. 4:24), and the corruption of his whole nature (Ps. 51:5; John 3:6; Rom. 3:18; Rom. 8:7--8; Eph. 2:3), which is commonly called original sin; together with all actual transgressions which proceed from it. (Gen. 6:5; Ps. 53:1--3; Matt. 15:19; Rom. 3:10--18, 23; Gal. 5:19--21; James 1:14--15)

### Question 19

_What is the misery of that estate whereinto man fell?_

A. All mankind by their fall lost communion with God (Gen. 3:8, 24; John 8:34, 42, 44; Eph. 2:12; Eph. 4:18), are under his wrath (John 3:36; Rom. 1:18; Eph. 2:3; Eph. 5:6) and curse (Gal. 3:10; Rev. 22:3), and so made liable to all the miseries of this life (Gen. 3:16--19; Job 5:7; Eccl. 2:22--23; Rom. 8:18--23), to death (Ezek. 18:4; Rom. 5:12; Rom. 6:23.) itself, and to the pains of hell forever. (Matt. 25:41, 46; 2 Thess. 1:9; Rev. 14:9--11)

## Resources

- [Walking Through Westminster - WCF 6, Of the Fall of Man, of Sin & of the Punishment Thereof](https://presbycast.libsyn.com/walking-through-westminster-wcf-6-of-the-fall-of-man-of-sin-of-the-punishment-thereof) podcast
- Meadowview Reformed Presbyterian Church (PCA) [Westminster Confession 6 - The Fall, Sin, & Punishment](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5TjKIHTqvmU&)
- A growing list of [resources on the Westminster Standards.](/notes/resources-on-the-westminster-standards/)
