---
title: "What Can the Righteous Do?"
description: "Lakewood Presbyterian Church in Dallas will host a fall conference 'What Can the Righteous Do?' in November with Dr. Joel Beeke and Dr. Joseph Pipa among other speakers."
date: 2023-08-12T23:55:00
layout: post
category: shortpost
blockquote: false
youtube: false
tags:
    - conference
    - LakewoodPCA
---

My friend Brad Denton and his church are hosting what looks to be a wonderful conference this November:

>It may be a new experience to this generation, but it is not new to the Church of Christ, nor does it catch our King unawares. At Lakewood’s Fall Conference, our speakers will propose from the witness of Scripture and the history of Christ’s church how Christians might walk honorably before the Lord, each according to our station, in our glorious commission to glorify God in all things and in all ages.

{% eleventyImage "./src/assets/images/not-mine/367718917_10228512607138020_8791180028417024205_n.jpg", "Front cover of brochure", "" %}

{% eleventyImage "./src/assets/images/not-mine/367458241_10228512608098044_2619287920708464089_n.jpg", "Conference schedule and speakers", "" %}

November 17-18, 2023
[Lakewood PCA,](https://www.lakewoodpres.com/church-home) Dallas, TX

[Register today for only $10](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/lakewood-presbyterian-church-fall-conference-what-can-the-righteous-do-tickets-673339495557) _This event is expected to fill up quickly, so register right away!_


## Conference FAQ (as posted on Facebook)

1. What is the church address (not on the flier!). Lakewood Presbyterian Church, 7020 Gaston Avenue, Dallas, TX 75214
2. I have a food allergy. Please contact Vivian with questions about what food will be served during the conference at ***@lakewoodpres.com.
3. Do I have to register to attend? You must register for the conference at Eventbrite (https://tinyurl.com/yc356bf4). There is no registration at the door. Registration will close November 12 in order for us to inform the caterer of the event of the attendance expected.
4. Where do I park? You may park in the three parking areas at the church. If this parking fills up the best option is to park along Gaston Parkway ([see map](https://www.google.com/maps/place/Lakewood+Presbyterian+Church/@32.814038,-96.7369029,18z/data=!4m6!3m5!1s0x864ea1f0de72ec11:0x2cf6478ba3c8bdba!8m2!3d32.8144438!4d-96.7370477!16s%2Fg%2F1wcxdhsg?entry=ttu)). Do not park on Gaston Avenue! Let your passengers off at the church and then park and cross at the crosswalk at the light at Gaston and West Shore. You can access Gaston Parkway at Loving. The next best option is to park on a side street behind the church such as Clayton, but do not block driveways.
5. Will there be books for sale? Reformation Heritage Books is providing a half off book table. Bring cash. If books are still available on Saturday, the church will have an app to accept payment. There will be several free issues of The Confessional Presbyterian journal that attendees may pick up while supplies last, and ability to sign up for a regular subscription. The CPJ is an annual theological journal founded in 2005 and is now published by Greenville Presbyterian Theological Seminary.
6. Will the conference be recorded? Yes. Video will likely be posted sometime after the conference.
7. If you have any other questions please contact Vivian at the email noted above.
8.  What about Sunday? Dr. Joseph Pipa will be preaching at Lakewood Presbyterian in the morning service on Nov. 19.  If you are not otherwise committed, email Vivian for the time (we are in the middle of switching our AM service time (so TBA as I write this draft).
